CONGestion RESponse and Signaling Working Group Charter (CONGRESS)

The IETF has long been responsible for standardizing  Congestion Control and
Active Queue Management (AQM) algorithms on the Internet. Conventionally, new
work on these subjects occurred in the TCP Maintenance (TCPM) or Transport and
Services (TSVWG) working groups. RFC 5033 describes a Best Current Practice to
evaluate proposals for new congestion control algorithms as Experimental or
Proposed Standard RFCs. When this workflow was established, TCP was the dominant
consumer of this work, and proposals typically emerged from research groups that
had limited ability and experience with running large scale tests to understand
the implications of their proposals.

In the IRTF, the Internet Congestion Control Research Group (ICCRG) has invited
talks on congestion control research and developments. Historically, it has not
produced documents despite the availability of the IRTF stream for Informational
and Experimental RFCs.

Over the last few years, several developments have raised questions about the
value of this model:

* The community working on congestion control and AQM, both industry and academia, now
has a much better understanding of the problem space, the likely issues, and how
to conduct large-scale tests to validate new designs. The degree of caution IETF
needs is lower, because our understanding has improved.

* IETF has standardized four transport protocols that use TCP-like congestion
controls: TCP, QUIC, SCTP, and DCCP. Non-TCP transports usually require their
own mechanism to adapt to TCP or TCP friendly congestion controls. Genuinely new
proposals tend to be done in reference to TCP only.

* Although numerous RFCs tweak existing algorithms, the IETF has not published
an Experimental RFC documenting a new general-purpose congestion control since
RFC 4782 in 2007.

* Among the most widely-deployed congestion controls today is Cubic, which was
developed without formal IETF review, deployed at scale (including as the
default in the Linux kernel and others), and much later acknowledged in
Informational RFC 8312 (a process to ratify the existing Cubic design as a
proposed standard, after the fact, is underway in TCPM).

* Large organizations control their own transport implementations and experiment
with new congestion control concepts at scale before conducting IETF review. 
Some of these proposals, published as RFCs (e.g., RFC8257 for DCTCP), target
specific closed domains such as data centers. 

* As the only Standards-Track general-purpose congestion control is Reno, other
standards reference it, although it is a minority of Internet traffic today.

* Some AQM algorithms that were originally published on the experimental track 
are becoming widely deployed. However, the original specifications do not 
always include more recent improvements and operational aspects.

A separate working group can review some of the impediments to early congestion
control work occurring in the IETF, and generalize transport in this area from
TCP to all the relevant transport protocols. The congestion control expertise in 
the working group would also make it a natural venue to take on any work on AQM 
algorithms. Accordingly, CONGRESS is chartered to do the following work:

* Conduct a review of RFC5033 and consider a revision that relaxes requirements
to encourage more experiments in the IRTF/IETF. Adoption of standards-track
work should consider empirical evidence of safety and stated intent to deploy by
major transport implementations.

* Define a conceptual framework for describing abstract algorithms that can have
concrete instantiations for each transport, and an approach to documenting each.
This might include norms for when protocol-specific considerations are minor
enough to include in the base document, or protocol-specific documents are
needed.

While this charter does not specify further deliverables, CONGRESS is authorized
to adopt other work relating to Congestion Control and AQM without rechartering. 
This work may be ongoing in TCPM, CORE, ICCRG, or elsewhere, and if so, 
coordination is required to decide between adoption of the work and consultation 
on it, based on its maturity, the quality of relevant review in either venue, 
and its match with the CONGRESS adoption criteria to be enumerated in the 
RFC 5033 update. The following are specifically in scope:

* Algorithms mature enough for standardization. CONGRESS may consider not
only the open internet, but also algorithms focused on Data Centers, “Controlled
environments”, Multipath, and Internet of Things use cases. Any adopted
document must be clear about the domains to which its operation is restricted,
and any such restriction requires approval of the Responsible AD.

* Algorithms proposed for Experimental status, in consultation with ICCRG.

* Tweaks to existing algorithms, such as Slow Start.

* New ways for endpoints to respond to both implicit and explicit congestion
signals.

* Progression of existing Informational or Experimental RFCs to higher maturity,
if they meet the criteria.

* Operational guidance, in general. 

Proposals that depend on the capabilities of a single transport protocol should
generally remain in the maintenance working group for that protocol (i.e., TCPM, QUIC,
TSVWG).

Informational RFCs documenting the state of congestion control in the Internet,
including assessments of compliance with existing standards, are out of scope,
but may be appropriate for the IRTF.

Real-time, media adaptation algorithms for peer to peer communication remain the
focus of RMCAT and are not in scope unless that group closes. However, proposals
for live streaming media adaptation may be applicable to both general purpose
and to RMCAT use cases, in which case CONGRESS can adopt them in consultation
with RMCAT.

Once the deliverables are complete, CONGRESS will not remain open simply “in
case” further work comes along. However, if the working group has adopted
further work in accordance with the guidelines above, it can recharter, add
milestones for them, and continue until that work is complete.
